Running Blast locally
=====================

If you want to develop on Blast, for most things, you will have to run Blast
locally to see the effect of your code changes. This pages walks you through
how to install Blast and get it running on your machine.

Install the Docker Desktop app
-------------------------------

The recommended option for installing and running Blast locally is to
use Docker. It is so strongly recommended in fact, that I'm not going to write
documentation on how to install and run Blast any other way. The first step is to
install the Docker Desktop application, which can be found
`here <https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/>`_ for Mac, Windows, and Linux. Make
sure you have Docker Compose version 1.28.0 or later.  We recommend allocating
at least 32 GB of memory in the Docker settings.

Clone the Blast repository
--------------------------

Clone the Blast repository.

.. code:: bash

    git clone https://github.com/scimma/blast.git

Setup environment file
----------------------

Blast needs some environment variables to run. All of
these are defined with their default values in the :code:`env/.env.default` file. If you want to override any of the default values or add additional environment variables, define these in a file named :code:`env/.env.dev` following the same format as :code:`env/.env.default`.

You will likely want to change the :code:`BLAST_IMAGE` variable in your :code:`env/.env.dev` to be
:code:`blast_base` instead of :code:`blast_latest`. This will force Docker to build the image locally **AND** the :code:`app` source code
directory will be mounted in the container to facilitate live code editing. Otherwise the static published image will be downloaded and used, and local code changes will be ignored.

If you need to ingest real transient data from the Transient Name Server (TNS), you will need to populate the TNS variables with TNS API bot credentials (see `<https://www.wis-tns.org/bots>`_).

Run the Blast app
-----------------

You are encouraged to use the helper scripts to start (:code:`run/blast.up.sh`)
and stop (:code:`run/blast.down.sh`) the application. These scripts use a
combination of :code:`docker compose` and :code:`docker` commands to properly
manage the container lifecycles.

To launch the full Blast stack, invoke the :code:`run/blast.up.sh` script with
the :code:`full_dev` Docker Compose profile:

.. code:: bash

    bash run/blast.up.sh full_dev

Alternatively, if you are only interested in running the web server and database, which is
usually sufficient for front end web development, you can use the :code:`slim_dev` Docker Compose
profile:

.. code:: bash

    bash run/blast.up.sh slim_dev

Then go to `http://0.0.0.0:8000/ <http://0.0.0.0:8000/>`_  in your web browser
after all the containers have started, and Blast should be running.

Running Blast in these two modes means you can edit most code and you will see
the resulting live changes in the web interface.

.. tip::
    If you want to run multiple independent instances of Blast (unusual) or you want 
    to customize the default Docker Compose project name ``blast``, set the 
    ``COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME`` prior to running the up/down scripts; for example: 
    ``export COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME=dev-blast``.


To terminate Blast and remove the containers, open a new terminal window and run:

.. code:: bash

    bash run/blast.down.sh $PROFILE

where :code:`$PROFILE` is the active Docker Compose profile as described above
(for example, :code:`slim_dev`).

.. warning::

    When you stop the Blast container make sure all services are stopped. You can see which
    services are running in the Docker Desktop app and stop services manually there (or run
    ``docker ps --all``).

Persistent data volumes
-----------------------

There are three Docker volumes created for persistent data storage: (1) :code:`blast-data`, (2) :code:`blast-db`, and (3) :code:`django-static`. When you run Blast for the first time, these are created automatically by Docker, and then the initialization script populates each volume.

The :code:`blast-db` volume stores the Django SQL database, and it is provisioned by standard Django migration commands. The :code:`django-static` volume stores the Django static files, which are generated by standard Django commands as well.

The :code:`blast-data` volume stores astronomical data. During initialization, all required data files are downloaded and installed.

The Docker volume names are prepended by the Docker Compose project name (default ``blast``) and joined with an underscore. You can list them like so:

.. code:: bash

    $ docker volume ls
    ...
    local     blast_blast-data
    local     blast_blast-db
    local     blast_django-static

To restart the application with a clean Django database, add the :code:`--purge-db` option to the stopping command as shown below. Alternative options include :code:`--purge-data` (delete only astro data) and :code:`--purge-all` (delete astro data AND Django database). These options are mutually exclusive, and only one can be used.

.. code:: bash

    # Stop and remove services and internal networks
    bash run/blast.down.sh $PROFILE --purge-db

The initialization process is idempotent, meaning that it is safe to repeatedly restart the services with or without existing application data.

The initialization process generates temporary files on the astro data volume (:code:`/mnt/data/.initializing_db` and :code:`/mnt/data/.initializing_data`) to support the scenario where multiple replicas of service containers are running concurrently. These files are automatically removed by the :code:`run/blast.up.sh` script.


Testing the Blast app
---------------------

To run tests with the Blast app, while the :code:`full_dev` or :code:`slim_dev` containers are
up, in a separate terminal run

.. code:: bash

    bash run/blast.test.sh slim_dev

This allows you to run the tests without stopping the containers. *Some of the tests are excluded in this mode* because the assumption is that you are iterating on the unit tests themselves and probably do not want a slow iteration cycle, for example when cutout data is downloaded.

To run all tests from scratch in an dedicated container that does not mount any host paths, run

.. code:: bash

    bash run/blast.up.sh ci
    bash run/blast.down.sh ci --purge-db


Building the Blast app image
----------------------------

The Blast app image is a multi-stage build, where the base image is built separately because it is so large and does not often need to change, and it minimizes the duration of the CI pipeline that automatically builds and pushes the official image. To build the base image, use the following pattern, where :code:`$YYYYMMDD` is some immutable tag:

.. code:: bash

    docker build app/ \
        -f app/Dockerfile.deps \
        -t registry.gitlab.com/ncsa-blast/kubernetes/blast/deps:latest \
        -t registry.gitlab.com/ncsa-blast/kubernetes/blast/deps:$YYYYMMDD

Update :code:`app/Dockerfile` with the new tag :code:`$YYYYMMDD`. Then rebuild the app image -- incorporating the updated dependencies -- by launching the :code:`slim_dev` Compose profile:

.. code:: bash

    bash run/blast.up.sh slim_dev
    bash run/blast.down.sh slim_dev --purge-db

And, finally, run the unit tests as described in the previous section before opening a pull request.
